I think everybody should be most worried
about what they don't know about the
future.
>> Okay. I I am worried about that. That's
why I'm That's why I'm asking you to
tell me.
>> is I think we know [music] that we are
in increasingly disorderly times.
>> Lately I feel like we're having kind of
an end of the American Empire moment. In
part, it's our stalemated war in [music]
Iran. The Strait of Hormuz is closed.
The nuclear material still in their
hands. Americans [music]
are being crushed. In part, it's just
the strain that Donald Trump is putting
on American alliances and the whole
post-World [music] War II order or
whatever remains of it. And in part,
it's the sense that our biggest [music]
rival, China, is sort of patiently
biding their time. Watching us flail
around, waiting for us to [music] just
collapse.
My guest this week has been on this beat
for a while now, and he has [music] a
grand theory of history that predicts
that America is headed for a fall. He's
kind of an [music] unlikely Cassandra.
Ray Dalio built one of the world's
largest hedge fund, Bridgewater
Associates, from [music] the ground up.
But these days, he mostly wants to talk
about our imperial decadence and whether
there's [music] anything we can do to
pull the American Empire back from the
brink.
>> Ray Dalio, welcome to Interesting Times.
>> Thank you. It's interesting to be in
interesting times.
>> say. So, you're someone who spent your
career making bets, and a substantial
number of them have paid off over the
last few decades. And lately, you have
been arguing that the United States of
America is maybe not such a good bet at
the moment. So if someone is looking at
America right now, trying to decide,
let's say, whether to bet on the
American empire as a dominant force in
the 21st century, what are the big
forces or factors that they should be
looking at?
>> Yeah, I
>> [clears throat]
>> I correct that. I'm not saying that
America is a bad bet or a good bet.
I'm just describing what's going on. And
what I learned through my roughly 50
years of investing is that many things
that are important that happened to me
um didn't happen in my lifetime before,
but happened many times in history.
And so I learned to study um the last
really 500 years of history to find what
will cause the rises and declines of
reserve currencies, their empires, and
so on. And you see a pattern over and
over again. And there is such a thing as
a big cycle. And the big cycle starts
when there are new orders. There are
three types of orders. There's a
monetary order.
There is a domestic political order.
And [snorts] there is an international
world order. And so these are three big
forces that evolve. So, on the first
force um as we look at that monetary
order, there's a debt cycle. Okay? When
debts rise relative to incomes and debt
service payments rise relative to
incomes for countries, for individuals,
for anybody
>> Yep.
>> that squeezes out spending. That's a
problem. So, for example, the United
States now spends $7 trillion, about $7
trillion. It takes in about $5 trillion.
So, it spends 40% more than it takes in.
It's been running those deficits for a
while. So, it has a um debt that's about
six times its in income, the amount it
takes in. And you can see throughout
history that that produces problems. And
it's a very simple thing. The debts for
a country work the same as a debts for
an individual or a company
except the government can print money.
>> Right. So, which is which is an
important difference,
>> difference, okay?
>> Just speaking personally, that's I can't
print money to pay my mortgage, right?
>> Right. But what that does is it also
devalues money, okay? So, that's the
mechanics. That's why there is a
long-term debt cycle as well as
shorter-term debt cycles that and money
cycles and economic cycles that that
take us from one recession to a
overheating to another recession.
Related to that is the domestic
political and social cycle that relates
to the money part. And when you have
very large wealth and values
differences,
big gaps in those,
>> Meaning between rich and poor? Between
>> Between rich and poor and those with
different values.
Um and you get to the point where there
are irreconcilable differences,
>> [snorts]
>> then you have political conflicts that
are such that the system is at risk,
okay? I I think we have the first that I
talked about, first cycle going on. I
think we have the second cycle going on,
okay? The political left and right and
their irreconcilable differences. We can
get into those.
>> And then so then how does the
international aspect factor in?
>> is the same thing, okay?
Internationally,
there is um always
uh following a war, there is a dominant
power and the dominant power creates the
new world order, okay? This order means
the system. And so, that began in 1945.
>> For us,
the United States was the dominant power
establishing that system.
>> That's right. Okay. And it established
the system which was largely
modeled after the United States system
in that it was meant to be
representative,
the United Nations for example. This is
the multilateral
world order they call it. And so all
different countries would operate and
there was a supposed to be a rule-based
system. And but the the problem with
that is that without enforcement is not
going to be an effective system. It was
an idealistic system and it was a
beautiful system while it lasted, but we
no longer have a multilateral rule-based
system. We have what existed prior to
1945 through most of history and now
you're going to have geopolitical
disagreements such as even what is
existing with Iran.
How are those disagreements resolved?
You don't take it to the world court and
get a verdict and get it enforced. It's
power that rules.
>> Right. But even but just just on that
point even at the height of what we
think of as the rules-based
international order, first for most of
that history the US was in conflict with
the Soviet Union, right? So there was an
ongoing Cold War. So there was a it was
a relatively narrow window of just that
system existing independent of great
power conflict and even then, right?
American power was in the end sort of
the decisive
>> Of course. Because
the Soviets did not have real power.
They had military power. But at the end
of World War II, the United States had
80% of the world's money. It had half
the world's GDP
>> [snorts]
>> and it also had the dominant military
power. So as a result we could give away
money, and those who received the money
appreciated the money, and then they had
the Soviet system, which was a very
limited part and financially almost
broke or certainly insignificant.
>> Okay. So, the military balance of power
was real, but the financial balance
balance of power just put America in
charge, basically. Yeah.
>> when fortunately, when there was
mutually assured destruction,
we didn't use that military power. But
though, I remember when the Cuban
Missile Crisis as a kid, I watched, and
we didn't know whether there would be
you know, a nuclear exchange, but they
never came to that, and then the Soviet
Union collapsed.
>> And then what role do just contingent
events play in this kind of cyclical
view of history?
>> Uh all the events that come along, I
guess the question is do they lead to a
dispute?
And how is the dispute resolved in a
world where
there's not the court system that you go
to to resolve it either domestically or
internationally. So, for example, what's
happening in the Middle East,
uh particularly what's let's say
happening with Iran,
there's a conflict, and then there's uh
a war
as there's because there's no other
resolution. And what the world is
looking at right now is will this
war be able to be won by the United
States, or will it be lost? And when
when we look at that, it'll be measured
in almost black and white terms of who
will control the Strait of Hormuz, and
who will control the
nuclear materials? Will the United
States win a war? And we should also
recognize that there are alignments
here, so that China and Russia and Iran
uh tend to be more supportive of each
other as just as there are uh you know,
supports on the other side.
>> Right. And that again, just to sort of
emphasize what's distinctive about this
moment relative to
um the past few decades, certainly,
right? It's the strength of the
alignment on the other side. Like, what
are you
>> It's relative It's the relative strength
and the breakdown of that order. In
addition, there are big debtor-creditor
relationships that enter into it. For
example, when the United States
runs large deficits,
it has to borrow money.
And [snorts] that is very risky during
periods of conflict. And so are
interdependencies.
In other words, in this world of greater
risk, you have to have self-sufficiency
because history has taught us that uh
you can be cut off.
At either side can be cut off.
>> Yeah, I'm I'm just I'm very interested
in how the pieces fit together, right?
So, suppose the end game in Iran is that
we are perceived to have lost the war or
at the very least failed failed in our
objectives. Um maybe the Strait of
Hormuz is open, but the Iranian regime
is still in power and there there's just
sort of perception that America
tried, you know, tried this thing and it
didn't work. You think that that then
bleeds back into people's perceptions of
are we trustworthy to pay our debts?
>> I I was just through Asia. I just spent
about a month in Asia going and meeting
different leaders and others. Um
it has a very big implication, very much
like uh the implication that um
happened when the British lost the Suez
Canal
because Egypt took control of the Suez
Canal.
>> Right.
>> And that was perceived to be the end of
the British Empire. In other words, very
significant.
>> Right.
>> And not only
>> This was in the 1950s.
>> That's right.
>> Yeah.
>> And that's also
when there was
not a willingness to hold the debt and
and so on.
What's happening now in different
countries is the question
will the United States defend us?
Or is the United States not in a
position to defend us?
Because the population does not want to
fight a war that lasts long. So the war
has to be quick and not expensive and
>> Popular.
>> Popular. Right. Which our wars don't
tend to be these days.
>> Okay. So
>> to just to stay with with the Suez
analogy just just for a minute though
because I think it's interesting and
we've heard I've heard a lot of people
offer that analogy.
So this was a case where
Britain and the French and the Israelis
basically tried to retake the Suez Canal
after it was nationalized by Egypt. So
obviously there's parallels to Iran. You
have a choke point in global trade. You
have a conflict over it between Western
powers and a regional power.
But in that case the key element of Suez
it seems to me was that Dwight
Eisenhower and the United States
basically told the British no, you're
not going to do that, right? And so part
of the crisis [snorts] in confidence for
the British Empire and the British pound
and everything else was connected to
this realization that
you know, this is as you said before
like it's the post World War order and
America is in charge.
Do you need that to happen with China?
Right? Do you do you need to have a
similar moment
for people to really lose confidence in
America? How much do you need a new
hegemon to emerge, I guess is what I'm
asking, for people to abandon the old
one?
>> By the way, I don't think
China will end up being the classic
hegemon, which we can get into for in a
in a in a few minutes, but um
uh what I would say is um
there was the combination of the British
debts
and the fact that it clearly lost power.
The decline began before the Suez. There
was a recognition that the United States
was in a financially better position as
well as a world power. So, being my main
point
>> does that But then, how does I
if if there is value in that analogy,
what is the equivalent now if people
decide the US is no longer as
trustworthy as we thought, it's less
likely to pay off its debts, and so on.
And maybe this goes to your point about
China and whether they're a new hegemon,
do people go to China? Do people abandon
the dollar as a reserve currency? Where
Where does the money go if people lose
confidence in America?
>> I'll give you my thoughts in that, but I
also want to say this is typical of
every
cycle.
So, when the British took over from the
Dutch,
it happened in the same way.
>> Right.
>> Okay. The British were financially
strong, capably strong. They lost, and
it caused the shift from the Dutch
empire, which had the reserve currency
at the time and the debt. And so, it's
happened repeatedly the same way. So,
you don't need the particular of, let's
say,
um President Eisenhower
>> you need a successor power. That's what
I'm That's what I'm asking about.
>> Then I think what happens is, in answer
to your question of of where the money
goes or where the wealth is, okay?
You could be a dominant power. You could
still have a dominant power. And you
could still have financial problems.
Like the breakdown of the monetary
system in 1971. Okay? You know, I mean,
the United States was still a dominant
power. 1971, you had too much debt and
you couldn't back up your promise to
deliver gold and you had a breakdown of
the monetary system.
>> I have directed the Secretary of the
Treasury to suspend temporarily the
convertibility of the dollar into gold
or other reserve assets, except in
amounts and conditions determined to be
in the interest of monetary stability.
>> And we had the '70s in uh stagflation,
okay? You could still have that. So, the
The question
>> That is a situation where you have a
crisis. You don't have a successor power
yet, right? The Soviet Union didn't take
over in the '70s. We just went through a
really bad 10 years.
>> You still have lousy finances. And what
that means is holding the bonds is not a
good store hold of wealth. So, money, to
answer your question,
there are two purposes of money.
So, medium of exchange and a store hold
of wealth.
I [snorts] think that you're seeing
right now uh China's currency
increasingly become a medium of exchange
for a number of reasons.
But I very much doubt that China will uh
Chinese debt or whatever will be a
serious store hold of wealth because of
their history in not protecting wealth.
>> Right.
>> And I don't think any of the fiat
currencies will be effective store holds
of wealth.
>> A fiat currency, just for our listeners,
is just a currency issued by a
nation-state that isn't backed in gold
or anything else, right?
>> Where they can print the money.
>> So, when we look at history, we see that
in all such periods, all the fiat
currencies go down. Okay, and gold goes
up. Gold, right now, is the second
largest reserve currency of central
banks. In other words, the dollar's
first, then there's gold, then there is
euros, then there is yen. So, I I think
the question is, what is money as a
storehold of wealth?
>> Right.
>> But gold is now has been the leading
candidate for that out of default
because it's been the winner over the
last
>> So, alternatives So, alternatives to the
dollar
become more attractive without there
being this shift to just, you know,
we're just buying Chinese debt instead.
That That would be the prediction. How
So, then for Americans, right?
>> from transactions point of view, the way
it works traditionally,
is um
countries, as they start to transact in
a currency,
will build reserves in that currency for
it's like their cash account, so that
they expect that when they pay for those
things they just bought, um they have
enough cash on hand to do that. So, I
would expect that that would increase
the reserves. The issue of saving in
that debt is is a problem. So, we are in
a new world of saying, what is a safe
storehold of wealth?
>> Right. How does this then
for for the average American, sort of
looking at your cycle and saying,
"Okay, yeah, this has happened before,
it's happening again, we're going
through a period when we spent beyond
our means, and there's going to be a
correction."
What do you expect that correction to
look like? There's the 1970s, which is a
period of inflation and slow growth,
stagflation, right? There's the Great
Depression model, which is a financial
crash and crisis that leads to
poverty and deflation.
Which which one
should we be most worried about in this
environment?
>> Um I think everybody should be most
worried about what they don't
know about the future.
>> Okay. I I am worried about that. That's
why I'm That's why I'm asking you to
tell me.
>> what
um
we do not know a lot
about what the world will look like in 3
to 5 years. What we don't know is much
greater than anything we know. I think
we know that we are in increasingly
disorderly times. And these are the
greater risks. And so what do I think
that answer should be? I think that
answer should be to know how to have a
well-diversified portfolio that is
largely uh balanced for these kinds of
um
um uncertainties. I would say one
element to give us simplicity. If you're
saying what is my typical portfolio,
there's stocks, there's bonds, uh
there's investments in other countries.
Diversification is good. I'm not going
to be able to go through all the things
about how to structure that, but
I think any portfolio should have
between 5% and 15% in gold.
Because when you get into the really bad
times, for the rest of it,
that is when gold does best. Okay? So
whatever it is, it's one of the reasons
it's been such a great investment in the
sense of last few years, because there's
a movement in that direction. So I would
say um
balance, to know how to have good
diversification as a hedge against the
other stuff.
>> But so just
and I do as an investor myself, I do
want the investment advice. But as a
pundit,
a columnist, whatever I am, right, who's
trying to describe
or anticipate reality, even accepting
that we can't know for sure, if there
are these lessons from history, if there
are these sort of cycles that repeat,
and we're headed for a kind of
we can call it a bottoming out, we can
call it a reset, you know, maybe we
bounce back from it.
I'm just trying to get a sense of what
you think life looks like at the bottom
of the cycle, and whether it is a sort
of stagnation and unpersistent
unhappiness, or is it more like crisis
and, you know,
clashes [snorts]
in the streets kind of thing. Cuz the
'70s versus the '30s seem like different
examples. That's all.
>> you I'll give you um
my concerns.
I think we have these
big issues, the money issue, the
political social issue domestically, and
the international geopolitical issues,
okay? I think as I look at the clock,
um we're going to come into the midterm
elections, and I think that probably the
Republicans will lose the house, and I
think um from that point on, you're
going to see an intensification
of political conflict, political and
social conflict that'll take place in
that period, particularly there between
that election and the uh presidential
election in '28. I worry that those can
be irreconcilable differences. I don't
know how they will go down. I don't know
how the respect for rules and law and
order and whatever will keep law and
order. I am concerned about, but I'm not
predicting uh broader-based violence.
You could have broader base violence.
There are more guns in the United States
than people. So, I'm not I'm not
predicting and I'm Let me complete my
thought if I may.
I've seen the possibilities.
I think that um
everybody around them can look at these
things and judge for themselves. My
general reaction is that we are entering
a period of greater disorder to answer
your question. I think greater risk than
uh existed and it is following um that
arc. And I'm Now we talk with words, but
I plot things on uh charts in terms of
what the patterns are. And these things
are are following those kinds of
patterns. So, for that reason, I think
you asked me the question, I'm giving
you my answer. And I think for those
reasons, a good diversification of a
portfolio and to be alert to those types
of things.
>> Tell me how
you think the debt picture
and the political and social picture
interact because it seems like if you
ask people what they're divided about
right now,
they don't say interest payments on the
national debt, right? And they you know,
they they have a a much longer list of
things they're they're divided about.
And I'm I'm just curious how you think
So, interest payments go up, they crowd
out other forms of investment.
What is the economic force that
interacts with social disarray here?
>> Uh they're divided about who has what
money and and who gets it, okay? Uh so,
which is very much related to the
deficit. I I wrote my most recent book
to explain how it works with 35
examples. It was called How countries go
broke.
And I've been speaking to top levels of
both the Democrat and
Republican Party, and everybody agrees
on those mechanics.
>> Yes.
>> And then when I go down, I say you've
got to get to 3% of GDP deficit through
some mix of raising taxes, cutting
spending, and controlling interest
rates. Um that that's how you have to do
it mechanically and so on. But they and
they say, "Ray, you don't understand um
in order for us to be elected, I have to
make at least one of two promises.
>> Right.
>> I will not raise your taxes,
and I will not cut your benefits." Okay.
So, what the country's divided on is,
you know, let's say the
multi-billionaire class and those who
are not those who are struggling
financially, the left and the right, and
populism and so on. And that has a money
component. So, the deficit and the money
part is a very big part of the social
conflict part.
>> But so but so when you're talking to
politicians about and they give you the
spiel about how we can't raise taxes and
we can't cut spending, right? I think
the follow-up that they would say is
that people experience those things as
threats to
opportunity or equality, right? People
who rely on Medicare and Social Security
think this is the guarantee of equality.
People who rely on low taxes to build a
business think this is the guarantee of
opportunity. So, if you are trying to
sell those people on
cutting deficits to 3% of GDP,
what do you tell them you're saving them
from?
>> them from a financial crisis.
>> Okay.
>> What happens in a financial crisis in
the US? What does that look like?
>> Uh the financial crisis will mean that
um
the capacity to spend will be very
limited.
In other words, you can't afford
>> Right.
>> a military expenses and social expenses
and so on. So, that you'll be very
constrained.
And you'll have um because the demand
won't meet up with the supply, you'll
have interest rates going up, which will
curtail borrowing, will hurt markets and
so on. And that that will lead to the
central banks uh trying to balance that
by uh printing of money, which will also
devalue the money and create a
stagflation kind of environment.
>> Okay.
So, it sounds like in the worst case,
it's a combination of
it's 2008 financial crisis yielding
1970s style stagflation. I'm sorry to
try and demand
>> No, I'm happy to try to give
>> Well, because because just just just to
put it in perspective for you, I am 46
years old. I have lived my entire life
in the shadow of predictions about
the US deficit being unsustainable. The
first presidential election I really
remember is Ross Perot's campaign in
1992,
uh which was run in part on those
themes.
>> The dollar's gone through the floor.
Now, whose fault is that? Not the
Democrats, not the Republicans.
Somewhere out there there's an
extraterrestrial that's doing this to
us, I guess.
And everybody says they take
responsibility. Somebody somewhere has
to take responsibility for this.
>> But like a lot of Americans, that means
that
I tend to tune out the deficit argument.
The first time I feel like that
deficits, overspending became a really
big issue in for people's pocketbooks
since the 1990s was the wave of
inflation in the first couple years of
the Biden administration. So, I just
think it's
it's useful for me and for listeners to
understand concretely why are the 2030s
or the late 2020s
different from
the last 20 years when we've also had
these deficits.
>> Thank you for your curiosity. Okay?
And I feel compelled to give you that
answer. Okay? So it is like the plaque
building up. And so it's like you say,
like
I haven't had a heart attack yet. Okay?
And I can say
>> okay.
>> Okay. You haven't had a heart attack
yet. I understand you haven't had a
heart attack yet. Can I show you the MRI
of this plaque building up in your
system? And can you understand what I'm
saying about what that plaque that you
will have a heart attack if that plaque
then starts to get that. Can you
understand that? Can you understand
where the numbers are and where you are?
Look, it's your life.
>> [laughter]
>> It's your choices. Okay? And And ask
yourself, is that right or is that
wrong?
Okay? That's what you need to do for
your own well-being.
>> And so
in your story, it sounds like
if you combine that diagnosis with your
sense and my sense of how the American
political system currently works
that you're going to get at least a mild
version of the heart attack before you
get change. You said at the outset you
weren't really betting against America
in spite of like my podcaster's framing.
Are you optimistic that we could have I
guess you could call it a minor heart
attack and recover?
>> I I think we're going to come into a
period of greater disorder
as there's a confluence
between the the monetary part
the domestic social and political part
where there's irreconcilable differences
and the international world order part.
Um and I would say then I I I should
bring in two other factors. One of them
is acts of nature through history.
>> Pan- pandemics.
>> droughts, floods, and pandemics. Okay.
And if you take what is uh um most
people think about what's happening to
climate, it's not a movement toward
improvement, it's an a movement toward
worsening. And uh and then technology
and AI. And I think that we have to talk
about technology and AI as it enters
into this picture because it plays a
role. And the way it plays the roles I
think three ways.
Uh it can be a tremendous
productivity-enhancing
result that can help to um
um mitigate um a uh maybe a lot of
number of the debt problems and so on
and so forth. The perhaps.
Uh we can get into this. I don't think
it's going to come
across with that speed and so on.
>> Well, that's just just I can I hear this
from AI people. They they will say that
in a best case
AI if it just adds X percent to GDP
growth, X percent to productivity growth
that it reduces your original problem.
>> That's right. That's That's what I'm
saying. Yeah. Yeah.
>> That's what I'm saying. Because it can
produce the incomes, let's say, and the
incomes can help debt service payments
and the like. Okay. So, I just want to
say that's one of the three effects of
the AI. Um the second effect of that AI
it is now
creating enormous wealth gaps.
Okay. Those who are the beneficiaries of
it were approaching who will be the
first trillionaire, okay? The wealth gap
thing has increased at great amounts and
so on. And it will replace a lot of
jobs. And so, that's number two as a
factor, right? So, those gaps are an
issue, however we deal with them. They
will have to be dealt with. And that's
going to become probably a political
question, but that's an issue. And then
number three is the technologies
themselves can be used
for harm. A lot of power. It could be
used by other countries. It can be used
by those who want to inflict harm. It
could be used by those who want to steal
money. It can be used for harm.
>> Right. But in your in your pattern, in
your in your cycles, right? You can see
it as in that last sense it increases
geopolitical tensions potentially. It
tightens Cold War dynamics. It increases
domestic tensions.
>> That's right.
>> But it could ease
fiscal tensions.
>> Right, it could produce the
productivity. So,
>> But if it but if it has some of the bad
effects, it will probably have some of
the good effects, too, right? Like
>> And and how that balances
>> Yeah.
>> You know, and and we won't know what it
it is like um
in the future cuz it's too
our human capacity to
anticipate
what it'll be like in three to five
years. So, I think that we, for all
these forces, these five forces,
I think over the next five years it'll
be like going through a time warp.
Okay? It'll be
huge changes over the next five years in
all of these forces coming together. And
at the other side of that, it'll be
almost unrecognizable. It'll be very
different. And it'll be a period of
great change, a great turbulence.
Uh and then back to how Okay, so what
does one do knowing that one is not
going to know what that's going to be
like, then my own approach to this and
our recommendation is knowing how to
balance positions.
>> But for for politicians though, I feel
like listening to that account maybe
makes them say,
"Well, I know Ray Dalio wants us to cut
deficits to 3%, but he also thinks we're
going through a 5-year time warp unlike
anything in human history. So, maybe
we'll just wait and see what the world
looks like in in 5 years before we
painfully restructure Medicare and
Social Security."
>> think they're going to think about
where Ray Dalio thinks.
>> [laughter]
>> Well, no.
>> I think they're going to think about
like what what does the ballot box
think, you know?
>> Yes. No, no, absolutely. But there are
you know, I've I've talked to people in
Washington D.C. who have
there's always legitimate concern about
the deficit and there are actual
attempts to do something about it.
I guess what I'm interested in is
in your account of the rise and fall of
empires, Spanish Empire, British Empire,
the Dutch and many empire and so on.
You don't have these case studies of
a great power going through this cycle
hitting what you think of as the bottom
and then
bouncing back and sort of having another
run. Or do you? Cuz that's I mean look,
as as Americans, right? That's our goal.
If someone buys into your narrative,
they would say, "Okay,
but history isn't deterministic. We can
make choices and we can have ourselves
another cycle, right?"
>> Yes, and I think
I think that's possible, but here's what
the what what what has to happen, I
think.
And history would
uh, suggest that.
Plato talked about this cycle.
>> Yes, no, it's not.
>> in the Republic, okay? And he talked
about the democracy and the problems
with the democracy because,
uh, the people don't vote for what is
good for them in the and the strength.
Um, 60% of the American people have
below a sixth grade reading level.
And there's a problem with productivity
and so on. And they vote and they
determine a lot.
And so the question is, how in a
democracy, uh, can that happen? And, um,
you know, his view is that's when you
have, ideally, the benevolent despot,
somebody who is going to take control,
be strong, and and give for the country,
in a sense, bring people together.
However that happens, um, what you need
is a strong leader of the middle
who, on the, um,
recognizes, essentially, that the, um,
the partisanship and the conflict is
going to be a problem, but has the
strength to get people and and
everything working in a way that it
needs to work so that there can be a
debt restructuring of some form, there
can be an improvement in our education
system, there can be the structural
changes and efficiency. It's difficult
to run a big company. Imagine what it's
like to run this country. And and and to
run it well. So, a lot has to You have
to have a remarkable person with great
strength, and you have to have, um,
strong leadership that is then followed,
rather than, um, subverted by either of
those sides.
>> So, you're looking for
the Franklin Roosevelt, maybe the Ronald
Reagan figure of this particular crisis.
>> now than it has ever been?
>> Cuz we're further we're further down.
>> We you the
>> Right, we're further
>> Everybody's got an opinion. Do you know
how difficult it is to lead?
>> [laughter]
>> I mean, I mean, can you imagine? And
everybody's wants, you know, so can you
lead people
down the middle, bring people together,
and get them to do difficult things?
>> Right. But, we're also I mean, this is
something that I think about with this
these debates. We're also extremely
rich. Like, the United States is much
richer than it was
even in the 1980s. It's certainly much
richer than it was during the Great
Depression, right? And that,
you know, as much as people feel the
bite of inflation or feel, you know, the
struggle of a spike in the unemployment
rate, that that itself is a kind of
stabilizer. And so, it seems like you
can also see scenarios where like, let's
take the example of Japan, right? Japan
is a country that has carried a
tremendous debt burden for a long time,
and it has done so I I wouldn't say it's
done so with great success. It has
become less economically dynamic. It's
more stagnant. It's It's not where it
was in the 1980s or 1990s when people
were talking about Japan taking over the
world.
Um but it also has this kind of, you
know, wealthy older society stability.
Do you Do you think that's a plausible
scenario for the US?
>> think you
you raised two questions, and I want to
treat them
um separately, even though they're
related. Um the first is about um
the higher living standards and us being
richer. That has been true
through all history.
So, all of these times when before World
War
that has been true, and the big issue is
how people deal with each other.
>> Meaning that at the peak of debt, the
empire is richer than ever before.
>> W- We Yes, all if you take per capita
income, any measures, life expectancy,
any measures of well-being, and you do a
chart for Really, from the 1400s
In the Dark Ages, it was relatively
flat. And so, at every moment in time,
we as a as a world, as a society, have
been richer than before, making your
point. Okay, that didn't prevent World
War II, didn't prevent the debt
problems, didn't prevent any of those
things because the most important thing
is how people deal with each other. Can
they together deal with those problems?
And because realistically, so what if we
had 10% decline in our living standards
as part of a healthy adjustment? If So,
I'm almost finished, but I want to get
this out. So, so that's the That is the
first thing. Doesn't alleviate the debt
problem, doesn't alleviate the fighting
for who who control
>> But but maybe it does a little, right?
Like the '30s
>> I didn't interrupt you. Please don't.
Okay, I'll finish, and then you'll
reply. So, um
and on the Japanese case,
um or do you want me to answer this one,
and then we'll go to the Japanese case?
>> Wait on the Japanese. Just one question
on that. Don't you think though that
there is some Like if you take
the '30s, the '70s, and the aftermath of
the financial crisis in 2008 as
you know, each a period of some kind of
economic crisis,
it was better, right? The '30s The '30s
were worse than the '70s, and the '70s
were worse than the 2010s. So, maybe
things can stabilize a little a little
bit because we've gotten richer, right?
>> Yes, if you were to look at per capita
income, life expect Any measures of
standard of living or whatever it is,
and you were to see a graph
>> even I'm just saying even the fighting,
right, was not as bad in the '70s as it
was in the '30s. That's all I'm saying.
>> Well, I wouldn't make too much of that.
>> Okay.
>> Okay. In other words, I would say this
is much more like the 30s.
>> Okay.
>> Okay, for a variety of reasons. Having
to do with the measures, if you would
have say the severity of the debt, the
severity of the internal conflict. I
mean, I lived through these.
>> Yeah.
>> And I I would say
>> think we're worse off than the 70s?
>> Our conflicts our debt is worse off.
>> That's true.
>> Okay. And the United States um
dominance in the world order and the
conflict is worse off.
>> Okay.
>> Okay. So, I I would say that's
objectively um
the case. I'm not trying to make a bad
case. I'm just trying to be analytical
cuz
>> No, no.
>> I know my job is to bet correctly.
>> All right. So, so how about how about
our Japanese future? Could we have a
Japanese future?
>> The Japanese um situation is
um two main things, very interesting.
The uh Japanese debt
is an internal debt.
In [snorts] that particular case, the
way it was dealt with is that um the
central bank printed a lot of money and
bought the debt.
Okay. That's how they did it. And as a
result of that the Japanese yen declined
and so they had a tremendous
depreciation in the value of the wealth
because of the depreciation in the value
of the money and the debt. So, yes, we
can see something happening like that.
Okay. But, we also have a foreign 1/3 of
our debt is held by foreigners. Okay.
So, that's a different thing. And so,
and we as a country, you know, owe money
um
>> Well, and and
>> So, [clears throat] but yes, and if you
think that that's a good outcome
>> No, I don't I Well, I think it's
>> It's like the decline of the British
Empire.
>> No, I don't
>> You can have the decline of the British
Empire, It's same sort of thing.
>> No, I don't think it's a good outcome. I
I'm interested in it because in the case
of Japan, it's sort of a sustainable
stagnation rather than crisis and
collapse. But I think where I would
agree with you is that there
for various reasons that are beyond the
scope of this conversation, Japanese
society seems more likely to accept a
depreciation in living standards than
American society. And in that sense, it
probably isn't a model. Let me ask you a
last question in the form of a
comment about my own optimism
that you can respond to. Right? Which is
that
I mentioned earlier that, you know, I've
I've lived my entire life in a world of
people
worrying about deficits and deficit
spending. And I think it is completely
reasonable to say, as you've said, that
>> [snorts]
>> you know, just because the crisis hasn't
arrived doesn't mean that you aren't
going to have a heart attack tomorrow.
And so I I totally expect everything
you're describing to have significant
negative impacts on the United States.
At the same time, I do think it's a
weird moment where
the US
looks weak if you look at certain
indicators, but
you know,
we also can look very, very strong in in
many ways, right? Just if you look at
the last 10 or 15 years, our GDP growth
has substantially outpaced Western
Europe, Canada, peer economies, right?
We still have the world's most
profitable cutting-edge technology
companies. We still have the world's
most capable military. And then
socially, and we have a lot of problems,
but
are there other big countries in the
world that are better at assimilating
immigrants, that have higher birth
rates, that are geographically isolated
from major wars and refugee streams, and
so on?
I'm not sure there is a better bet. So,
I guess if I'm looking forward 50 years,
right?
Isn't America still, in the context of
the whole world order,
a place to have a to have a certain kind
of confidence in? What do you make of
that?
>> I think we can't frame it as
like in the beginning of what I objected
to was
is the United States going to win or
lose or any of that of that thing.
I think we know what healthy is.
There are only three things you any
country has to do in order to be
healthy. And this is throughout history.
>> [snorts]
>> First,
educate your children well
and in terms of their capabilities, the
quality of their ability to
be productive
and their civility.
Number two, have them come out to a
country in which there's order
and that people work together to be
productive so that there's broad-based
productivity and prosperity.
And don't get into a war.
Don't get into a civil war or don't get
into an international war.
That's all you have to do.
Then you can look at the fundamentals of
that. Are we educating our children well
so that they can be productive and and
capable and they're they're civil with
each other, that we have a civil
population.
Do we have an environment where there is
productivity and we can get along? I
think we have terrible circumstances. I
live in Connecticut and my wife helps
kids trying to get through high school.
The gaps [snorts] in education, the gaps
in these things and civility are real
problems, okay? So, I think that it it
really comes to that. You know, it's
basics. Do you earn more than you spend?
What's your income like?
What is your balance sheet like?
These are basics. You know those basics.
So if we can have those basics, yes, I
lived I thank God that I grew up in the
United States because oh my God, it was
unbelievable. It was the place that
anybody from anywhere in the world could
come and truly be a citizen. So it had
that real meritocracy. And I grew up in
a lower middle-class family. My dad was
a jazz musician. I could go to a good
school. I and I can I don't know, make
my way, okay? And and I think of that
creativity and all the wonderful things
broad-based education a middle-class
that we had a middle-class and we had
those things. And so I've seen the
difference and right? And so I know what
the fundamentals are and I look at
measures and I'm worried about that.
>> All right. Ray Dalio, thanks for joining
me.
>> Thank you for having me.
>> [music]